Adding more context to the rate limiting topic (#34925)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/performance/rate-limit.md

## Preventing DDoS Attacks

While rate limiting can help mitigate the risk of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks by limiting the rate at which requests are processed, it is not a comprehensive solution for Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks. DDoS attacks involve multiple systems overwhelming your application with a flood of requests, making it difficult to handle with rate limiting alone.

For robust DDoS protection, consider using a commercial DDoS protection service. These services offer advanced features such as:

- **Traffic Analysis**: Continuous monitoring and analysis of incoming traffic to detect and mitigate DDoS attacks in real-time.
- **Scalability**: The ability to handle large-scale attacks by distributing traffic across multiple servers and data centers.
- **Automated Mitigation**: Automated response mechanisms to quickly block malicious traffic without manual intervention.
- **Global Network**: A global network of servers to absorb and mitigate attacks closer to the source.
- **Constant Updates**: Commercial services continuously track and update their protection mechanisms to adapt to new and evolving threats.

> If using a cloud hosting service, then DDoS protection is usually available as part of the hosting solution, such as [Azure Web Application Firewall](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/products/web-application-firewall/), [AWS Shield](https://aws.amazon.com/shield/) or [Google Cloud Armor](https://cloud.google.com/armor/docs). Dedicated protections is available as Web Application Firewalls (WAF) or as part of a CDN solution such as - [Cloudflare](https://www.cloudflare.com/ddos/) or  [Akamai Kona Site Defender](https://www.akamai.com/us/en/products/security/kona-site-defender.jsp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If using a cloud hosting service, then DDoS protection is usually available as part of the hosting solution, such as [Azure Web Application Firewall](https://azure.microsoft.com/products/web-application-firewall/), [AWS Shield](https://aws.amazon.com/shield/) or [Google Cloud Armor](https://cloud.google.com/armor/docs). Dedicated protections is available as Web Application Firewalls (WAF) or as part of a CDN solution such as - [Cloudflare](https://www.cloudflare.com/ddos/) or  [Akamai Kona Site Defender](https://www.akamai.com/us/en/products/security/kona-site-defender.jsp)
```

        opt.QueueProcessingOrder = QueueProcessingOrder.OldestFirst;
        opt.QueueLimit = 2;
    });
});

var app = builder.Build();
```

The global limiter applies to all endpoints automatically when it's configured via options.GlobalLimiter, and no endpoint-specific policy is specified.

### 3. Enable rate limiting middleware
 In the Program.cs file, enable the rate limiting middleware by calling UseRateLimiter:

``` csharp
app.UseRouting();

app.UseRateLimiter();

app.UseEndpoints(endpoints =>
{
    endpoints.MapControllers();
});

app.Run();
```

### Apply rate limiting policies to endpoints or pages

#### Apply rate limiting to WebAPI Endpoints

Apply a named policy to the endpoint or group, for example:

``` csharp

app.MapGet("/api/resource", () => "This endpoint is rate limited")
   .RequireRateLimiting("fixed"); // Apply specific policy to an endpoint

```

#### Apply rate limiting to MVC Controllers

 Apply the configured rate limiting policies to specific endpoints or globally. For example, to apply the "fixed" policy to all controller endpoints:

``` csharp
app.UseEndpoints(endpoints =>
{
    endpoints.MapControllers().RequireRateLimiting("fixed");
});

```

> #### Apply rate limiting to Blazor Server Pages

Reviewer 2: For consistency with the Blazor articles ...

```suggestion
#### Apply rate limiting to server-side Blazor apps
```

> To set rate limiting to all pages,  `RequireRateLimiting(Policy)` can be specified on the MapRazorComponents call, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To apply rate limiting to all of the app's Razor components, specify <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RateLimiterEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.RequireRateLimiting%2A> on the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorComponentsEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorComponents%2A> call:
```

``` csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddInteractiveServerRenderMode()

>     .RequireRateLimiting("MyPagePolicy");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    .RequireRateLimiting("Policy");
```

```

> To set policy for individual Blazor Pages, the attribute must be applied to the Page and not the page handlers.

Reviewer 2: Not sure what is meant here by "page handlers," and it doesn't seem necessary to even mention it ...

```suggestion
To set a policy for a single Razor component, the [`[EnableRateLimiting]` attribute](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.EnableRateLimitingAttribute) is applied to the component with an optional policy name:
```

``` blazor
@page "/counter"
@using Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting

> @attribute [EnableRateLimiting("blazor")]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@attribute [EnableRateLimiting("Policy")]
```

<h1>Counter</h1>
```

> The `DisableRateLimiting` attribute can be used to disable rate limiting on a Razor Page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To disable rate limiting for a component, use the [`[DisableRateLimiting]` attribute](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.DisableRateLimitingAttribute).
```

> Note: `EnableRateLimiting` is only applied to a Razor Page if `MapBlazorComponents().RequireRateLimiting(Policy)` has ***not*** been called.

Reviewer 2: This seems out of position: I recommend moving it up to where the attribute is described. Either way on that, the following polishes it up a bit ...

```suggestion
The [`[EnableRateLimiting]` attribute](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.EnableRateLimitingAttribute) is only applied to a component if <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RateLimiterEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.RequireRateLimiting%2A> is ***not*** called on <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorComponentsEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorComponents%2A>.
```

Implementing a commercial DDoS protection service in conjunction with rate limiting can provide a comprehensive defense strategy, ensuring the stability, security, and performance of an app.

## Use Rate Limiting Middleware

The following steps show how to use the rate limiting middleware in an ASP.NET Core app:

1. Install the `Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting` package.:

  Add the `Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting` package to the project, via the NuGet Package Manager or   the following command:
  
  ```sh
     dotnet add package Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting
  ```

2. Configure rate limiting services.

  In the `Program.cs` file, configure the rate limiting services by adding the appropriate rate limiting  policies. Policies can either be defined as global or named polices. The following example permits 10 requests per minute by user (identity) or globally:
  
  ``` csharp
  builder.Services.AddRateLimiter(options =>
  {
      options.GlobalLimiter = PartitionedRateLimiter.Create<HttpContext, string>(httpContext =>
          RateLimitPartition.GetFixedWindowLimiter(

>               partitionKey: httpContext.User.Identity?.Name ?? httpContext.Request.Headers.Host.  ToString(),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
              partitionKey: httpContext.User.Identity?.Name ?? httpContext.Request.Headers.Host.ToString(),
```

3. Enable rate limiting middleware

   In the `Program.cs` file, enable the rate limiting middleware by calling [UseRateLimiter](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.builder.ratelimiterapplicationbuilderextensions.useratelimiter):
  
  ``` csharp
  app.UseRouting();
  
  app.UseRateLimiter();
  
  app.UseEndpoints(endpoints =>
  {
      endpoints.MapControllers();
  });
  
  app.Run();
  ```

### Apply rate limiting policies to endpoints or pages

#### Apply rate limiting to WebAPI Endpoints

Apply a named policy to the endpoint or group, for example:

``` csharp

app.MapGet("/api/resource", () => "This endpoint is rate limited")
   .RequireRateLimiting("fixed"); // Apply specific policy to an endpoint

```

#### Apply rate limiting to MVC Controllers

 Apply the configured rate limiting policies to specific endpoints or globally. For example, to apply the "fixed" policy to all controller endpoints:

``` csharp
app.UseEndpoints(endpoints =>
{
    endpoints.MapControllers().RequireRateLimiting("fixed");
});

```

#### Apply rate limiting to server-side Blazor apps

> To set rate limiting to all pages,  [`RequireRateLimiting(Policy)`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.builder.ratelimiterendpointconventionbuilderextensions.requireratelimiting) can be specified on the MapRazorComponents call, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set rate limiting for all of the app's Razor components, specify <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RateLimiterEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.RequireRateLimiting%2A> with the rate limiting policy name on the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorComponentsEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorComponents%2A> call in the `Program` file. In the following example, the rate limiting policy named "`policy`" is applied:
```

``` csharp
app.MapRazorComponents<App>()
    .AddInteractiveServerRenderMode()

>     .RequireRateLimiting("Policy");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    .RequireRateLimiting("policy");
```

```

> To set a policy for a single Razor component, the [`[EnableRateLimiting]` attribute](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.EnableRateLimitingAttribute) is applied to the component with an optional policy name:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To set a policy for a single Razor component or a folder of components via an `_Imports.razor` file, the [`[EnableRateLimiting]` attribute](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.EnableRateLimitingAttribute) is applied to the component with the policy name. In the following example, the rate limiting policy named "`override`" is applied. The policy replaces any policies currently applied to the endpoint. The global limiter still runs on the endpoint with this attribute applied.
```

``` blazor
@page "/counter"
@using Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting

> @attribute [EnableRateLimiting("Policy")]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@attribute [EnableRateLimiting("override")]
```

<h1>Counter</h1>
```

> The [`DisableRateLimiting`](/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.ratelimiting.disableratelimitingattribute) attribute can be used to disable rate limiting on a Razor Page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`DisableRateLimiting` attribute](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.DisableRateLimitingAttribute) is used to disable rate limiting for a component or a folder of components via an `_Imports.razor` file.
```

> The [`[EnableRateLimiting]` attribute](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.EnableRateLimitingAttribute) is only applied to a component if <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RateLimiterEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.RequireRateLimiting%2A> is ***not*** called on <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorComponentsEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorComponents%2A>.

Reviewer 2: The order of Line 166 and 168 should be swapped because Line 168 is a continuation of the preceding information on the `[EnableRateLimiting]` attribute.

> The [`[EnableRateLimiting]` attribute](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.EnableRateLimitingAttribute) is only applied to a component if <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RateLimiterEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.RequireRateLimiting%2A> is ***not*** called on <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorComponentsEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorComponents%2A>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`[EnableRateLimiting]` attribute](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.EnableRateLimitingAttribute) is only applied to a component or a folder of components via an `_Imports.razor` file if <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RateLimiterEndpointConventionBuilderExtensions.RequireRateLimiting%2A> is ***not*** called on <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.RazorComponentsEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapRazorComponents%2A>.
```

For more information, see the [CreateChained source code](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/79874806d246670ee5fe76e73ce566578fe675c0/src/libraries/System.Threading.RateLimiting/src/System/Threading/RateLimiting/PartitionedRateLimiter.cs#L52-L64)

> ## Chosing what happens when a request is rate limited

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Choosing what happens when a request is rate limited
```

* The `"sliding"` policy rate limiter is applied to the `Privacy` action.
* Rate limiting is disabled on the `NoLimit` action method.

## Rate limiting metrics

> The rate limiting middleware provides built-in metrics and monitoring capabilities to help understand how rate limits are affecting app performance and user experience. The following metrics are provided for rate limiting

Reviewer 3: Link to https://learn.microsoft.com/aspnet/core/log-mon/metrics/metrics?

Reviewer 3: The names provided below aren't correct.
See https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/diagnostics/built-in-metrics-aspnetcore?view=aspnetcore-9.0#microsoftaspnetcoreratelimiting

Reviewer: > The names provided below aren't correct. See https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/core/diagnostics/built-in-metrics-aspnetcore?view=aspnetcore-9.0#microsoftaspnetcoreratelimiting

I deleted that table and added a link to `#microsoftaspnetcoreratelimiting`

> The rate limiting middleware provides built-in metrics and monitoring capabilities to help understand how rate limits are affecting app performance and user experience. The following metrics are provided for rate limiting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rate limiting middleware provides [built-in metrics and monitoring](/aspnet/core/log-mon/metrics/metrics) capabilities to help understand how rate limits are affecting app performance and user experience. The following metrics are provided for rate limiting
```

> | Metric  | Description | Type |
> | --- | --- | --- |
> | `Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.RequestsPerformed` | Counts successful (allowed) requests | Counter|
> | `Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.RequestsRejected` | Counts rejected requests | Counter |
> | `Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.CurrentLeases` | Current number of active leases | Gauge |
> | `Microsoft.AspNetCore.RateLimiting.CurrentQueuedRequests` | Current number of queued requests | Gauge |

Reviewer: Delete this table as we now link to the rate limit doc.
```suggestion
```
